Dual region pages update for clarity (#4342)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/concepts/multi-region/dual-region.md

**Active-active** and **active-passive** are standard setups used in dual-region configurations to ensure that applications remain available and operational in case of failures.

In an **active-active** setup, multiple instances of an application or system are deployed in different regions or locations, and all instances actively process requests simultaneously. This setup ensures high availability and load balancing by distributing traffic across multiple regions.

In an **active-passive** setup, one instance or region is designated as the active region, handling all requests and processing. The passive region receives replicated data but remains idle, not processing client traffic unless the active region becomes unavailable. When a failure occurs in the active region, the passive region is activated, taking over the operations, usually after a manual or automated failover process.

## Disclaimer

:::caution

Running dual-region setups requires developing, testing, and executing custom [operational procedures](./../../operational-guides/multi-region/dual-region-ops.md) matching your environments. This page outlines key points to consider.

:::

> ## Dual-Region Architecture

Reviewer: technical writers --> naming here?

Afaik should be `Dual-region`

<DualRegion />

The depicted architecture consists of two regions. For illustrative purposes, we're showing a Kubernetes-based installation. Each region has a Kubernetes cluster, which includes key Camunda 8 components. These clusters communicate, but only the active region handles user traffic.

One of the regions will be considered **active** and the other **passive**. User traffic must only reach the **active** region. We consider **Region 0** (underlined in green) the active region and **Region 1** the passive region. In this case, user traffic would only go to **Region 0**. **Region 1** would be considered passive and used in case of the loss of the active region. Due to Zeebe's data replication, you can recover from an active region loss by utilizing the passive region without much downtime.

> Zeebe stretches across the regions due to its use of the [Raft protocol](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)>), allowing it to communicate and replicate data between all brokers. Zeebe exports data to two Elasticsearch instances, one in each region. Operate and Tasklist are connected to the local ElastiCache infrastructure.

Reviewer: Where is ElastiCache suddenly coming from? 🤔

#### Elasticsearch

We treat Elasticsearch as an **active-passive** component. While it can be stretched across regions, this is not officially supported and may impact Zeebe’s performance. Each region has its own Elasticsearch instance. Zeebe is exporting data to both instances and provides data replication.

We recommend the approach of one Elasticsearch per region and configuring Zeebe to export the Elasticsearch data to both regions.

#### Operate and Tasklist

These components are **active-passive** components and, in their current state, not highly available as we're limited by the included exporters that would cause data issues when running multiple instances at the same time.

Only a single component instance can be running in every region (for example, in Region 0, there is 1 instance of Operate and 1 instance of Tasklist; the same is true in Region 1).

One instance must be actively serving traffic while the other is on standby.

> Operate and Tasklist stores some data in memory. In the event of a total active region loss, the following data loss will occur:

Author: Could you give me new sentence?

> Operate and Tasklist stores some data in memory. In the event of a total active region loss, the following data loss will occur:

Reviewer: > Operate and Tasklist store certain data in the active region, as they write directly to Elasticsearch, and this data is not replicated through Zeebe. In the event of a total active region loss, the following data loss will occur:

- Operate Losses: Uncompleted batch operations
- Tasklist Losses: Task assignments

## Requirements and Limitations

### Installation Environment

Two Kubernetes clusters are required for the Helm chart installation.

Amazon OpenSearch is **not supported** in dual-region configuration.

#### Network Requirements

> - Kubernetes clusters, services, and pods must not have overlapping CIDRs. Each cluster must use distinct CIDRs that do not conflict or overlap with those of any other cluster.

Reviewer: We have reached the point where we have to mention the CIDR overlap explicitly, and now you're removing the reasoning behind its importance.

If I were a reader who had no idea about the topic, I would assume the limitation lies in the application.

I'm fine with the change, it's just funny how this topic has evolved.

- Maximum network round trip time (**RTT**) between regions should not exceed **100 ms**.
- Required open ports between the two regions:
  - **9200** for Elasticsearch (for cross-region data pushed by Zeebe).
  - **26500** for communication to the Zeebe Gateway from clients/workers.
  - **26501** and **26502** for communication between Zeebe brokers and Zeebe Gateway.

### Zeebe Cluster Configuration

The following Zeebe brokers and replication configuration is supported:

- `clusterSize` must be a multiple of **2** and at least **4** to evenly distribute brokers across the two regions.
- `replicationFactor` must be **4** to ensure even partition distribution across regions.
- `partitionCount` is unrestricted but should be chosen based on workload requirements. See [understanding sizing and scalability behavior](../../../components/best-practices/architecture/sizing-your-environment.md#understanding-sizing-and-scalability-behavior). For more details on partition distribution, see [documentation on partitions](../../../components/zeebe/technical-concepts/partitions.md).

> ### Camunda 8 Dual-Region limitations

Reviewer: maybe for the technical writers to have a look over.

I would have kept it at `dual-region` or maximum at `Dual-region` (looks odd to me mid sentence) but at least `Dual-Region` I was shunned for in the past.

| Identity Support               | Identity, including multi-tenancy and Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), is currently unavailable in this setup.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Optimize Support               | Not supported (requires Identity).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

> | Connectors Deployment          | Connectors can be deployed in a Dual-Region setup, but attention to [idempotency](../../../components/connectors/use-connectors/inbound.md#creating-the-connector-event) is required to avoid event duplication. In a dual-region setup, you'll have two connector deployments and using message idempotency is of importance to not duplicate events.                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer: maybe for the technical writers to have a look over.

I would have kept it at `dual-region` or maximum at `Dual-region` (looks odd to me mid sentence) but at least `Dual-Region` I was shunned for in the past.

| Web Modeler                    | Web Modeler is a standalone component that is not covered in this guide. Modelling applications can operate independently outside of the automation clusters.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

### Infrastructure and deployment platform considerations

Multi-region setups come with inherent complexities, and it is essential to fully understand these challenges before selecting a dual-region configuration.

For example, consider the following areas that must be managed (Areas outside of our control and not covered in our guides):

- Managing multiple Kubernetes clusters and their deployments across regions.

> - Dual-Region monitoring and alerting.

Reviewer: Whooot, you mean I have to monitor both regions? /s

I'm fine with the change, just found it funny that we have to point it out explicitly.

![](https://media.wired.com/photos/5f87340d114b38fa1f8339f9/master/w_1600%2Cc_limit/Ideas_Surprised_Pikachu_HD.jpg)

Author: The monitoring of a single cluster (how to) is our responsibility. So I qualify it that we don't deal with dual-region

Reviewer: We tell people how to monitor and alert?
Isn't that very customer specific as there are different requirements and different tools with different solutions?

Author: Yes, we have information here and there, but general principle, we are/will/should telling customers how to monitor and what alerts to set up

- Operate
- Tasklist

#### Zeebe

Zeebe operates in an **active-active** mode and replicates data between its brokers. Due to its replication logic, it can handle an entire region failure without data loss, but it requires proper partitioning and replication. Please, read through the [cluster technical concept](./../../../components/zeebe/technical-concepts/clustering.md) to learn more about the [Raft protocol](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raft_(algorithm)>).

#### Elasticsearch

We treat Elasticsearch as an **active-passive** component. While it can be stretched across regions, this is not officially supported and may impact Zeebe’s performance. Each region has its own Elasticsearch instance. Zeebe is exporting data to both instances and provides data replication.

We recommend the approach of one Elasticsearch per region and configuring Zeebe to export the Elasticsearch data to both regions.

#### Operate and Tasklist

These components are **active-passive** components and, in their current state, not highly available as we're limited by the included exporters that would cause data issues when running multiple instances at the same time.

> Only a single component instance can be running in every region (for example, in Region 0, there is 1 instance of Operate and 1 instance of Tasklist; the same is true in Region 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only a single Component instance can run in each region (for example, in Region 0, there is 1 instance of Operate and 1 instance of Tasklist; the same is true in Region 1).
```

One instance must be actively serving traffic while the other is on standby.

Operate and Tasklist store some data in the active region, as they write directly to Elasticsearch, and this data is not replicated through Zeebe. In the event of a total active region loss, the following data loss will occur:

- Operate Losses: Uncompleted batch operations
- Tasklist Losses: Task assignments

## Requirements and limitations

### Installation environment

Two Kubernetes clusters are required for the Helm chart installation.

> Amazon OpenSearch is **not supported** in dual-region configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Amazon OpenSearch is **not supported** in dual-region configurations.
```

| Identity Support               | Identity, including multi-tenancy and Role-Based Access Control (RBAC), is currently unavailable in this setup.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Optimize Support               | Not supported (requires Identity).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

> | Connectors Deployment          | Connectors can be deployed in a Dual-Region setup, but attention to [idempotency](../../../components/connectors/use-connectors/inbound.md#creating-the-connector-event) is required to avoid event duplication. In a dual-region setup, you'll have two connector deployments and using message idempotency is of importance to not duplicate events.                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Connectors Deployment          | Connectors can be deployed in a dual-region setup, but attention to [idempotency](../../../components/connectors/use-connectors/inbound.md#creating-the-connector-event) is required to avoid event duplication. In a dual-region setup, you'll have two connector deployments and using message idempotency is of importance to not duplicate events.                                                                                                                                  |
```

Echoing standardizing on this as `dual-region` (lowercase). If we'd like it to be capitalized, like a feature, we should update it throughout the guide.

| Web Modeler                    | Web Modeler is a standalone component that is not covered in this guide. Modelling applications can operate independently outside of the automation clusters.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

### Infrastructure and deployment platform considerations

Multi-region setups come with inherent complexities, and it is essential to fully understand these challenges before selecting a dual-region configuration.

> For example, consider the following areas that must be managed (Areas outside of our control and not covered in our guides):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following areas must be managed independently, and are not controlled by Camunda or covered by our guides:
```

- Managing multiple Kubernetes clusters and their deployments across regions.

> - Dual-Region monitoring and alerting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Dual-region monitoring and alerting.
```

::caution
Customers are expected to proactively monitor for regional failures and take ownership of executing the necessary [operational procedures](./../../operational-guides/multi-region/dual-region-ops.md) to ensure smooth recovery and failover.
::

### Active region loss

The total loss of the active region results in the following:

- **Service Disruption**: Traffic routed to the active region can no longer be served.
- **Workflow Engine Impact**: The workflow engine stops processing due to quorum loss.
- **Loss of Tasklist and Operate operations**: Uncompleted batch operations and Tasklist assignments will be lost

#### Steps to take in case of active region loss

1. **Temporary Recovery:** Follow the [operational procedure for temporary recovery](./../../operational-guides/multi-region/dual-region-ops.md#failover) to restore functionality and unblock the workflow engine.
2. **Traffic Rerouting:** Reroute traffic to the passive region, which will now become the new active region.
3. **Data and Task Management:** Due to the loss of data in Operate and Tasklist:

>    1. Reassign any uncompleted tasks in the Tasklist.

Author: we are referign to a spesific in thsi configuration. The article could be used, it's a matter of style. 
@conceptualshark wdyt?

>    1. Reassign any uncompleted tasks in the Tasklist.

Reviewer 2: I think clarifying which region it belongs to makes more sense/would help with the article usage. For example:
```suggestion
   1. Reassign any uncompleted tasks in the lost region's Tasklist.
```

   2. Recreate batch operations in Operate.
4. **Permanent Region Setup:** In case of permanent/complete region loss, follow the [operational procedure to create a new permanent region](./../../operational-guides/multi-region/dual-region-ops.md#failback) that will become your new passive region.

### Passive region loss

The loss of the passive region results in the following:

> - **Workflow Engine Impact**: The workflow engine will stop processing tasks due to the loss of quorum.

Reviewer: Mhm, tasks sounds like a subset of things in Zeebe.
Like user task or service task, could be misunderstood.

It stops processing processes sounds stupid.
Maybe we could reword it?
